This video we'll learn a little bit more about C++ as scope rules C++ uses scope rules to determine
when and where an identifier can be used.
It uses static or lexical scope in which means that the scope is determined the same way you read a
program.
C++ has two main scopes local scope and global scope
local or block scope refers to the visibility of an identifier that's been declared in a block.
That is a set of open or closed curly braces function parameters also have block scope.
These identifiers are visible within the block in which they are declared.
I talked about this earlier in the course but it's important to understand it in the context of functions
when a function is called.
You can think of the function as being activated and the function parameters are bound to storage.
They become alive and their lifetime is while the function is executing.
Once the function completes the function is deactivated and these variables and parameters are no longer
alive.
That doesn't mean that they're somehow marked as unavailable.
It simply means that the compiler doesn't recognize them any longer and the storage they were bound
to will likely be reused.
That means that the values of local variables are not preserved between function calls.
If we have nested blocks then statements in the inner blocks can see identifiers declared and the outer
blocks but outer blocks cannot see variables defined in the inner blocks.
However there is one type of variable whose value is preserved between function calls.
This is a static local variable.
It's a variable whose lifetime is the lifetime of the program.
But it's only visible to the statements in the function body.
These variables can come in very handy when you need to know a previous value in a function without
having to pass it in all the time.
Static local variables are only initialized once if no initializer is provided they're set to zero identifiers
with global scope or identifiers that are declared outside of any function or class.
These identifiers are visible to all parts of the program following their declaration.
Best practice with identifiers with global scope is that it's OK to use global constants but global
variables should be avoided.
Let's see scope rules in action in the ID.
OK so now I'm in the code like IEEE and I'm in the section 11 workspace in the scope example project.
Here I've got an example program that just exercises a few of the scope rules and I'll walk through
them.
They're very straightforward.
The nice thing about languages like C++ and other languages that use static scoping is that the scoping
is lexical So it's as you read the code it's not something that's happening at runtime on the call stack
languages that use dynamic scoping rules are a little harder to follow in this sense.
So let's take a look at this example here.
I've got my main and I've got two local variables defined in Maine.
They're local to Maine because they're defined inside those brackets.
OK that's really important.
So what's the scoping deal all about.
Well when I use a variable name for example I'm using Gnome here which no way am I talking about.
That's what scope is all about.
And the rule is really very simple.
First you look inside your own scope inside your local scope.
So here is not why I'm using it.
Which one is it.
Well look in the inside your scope here and you'll see it's this one right here right.
That's the closest one within the scope that you're in.
So this is going to print 100 now block statements just like we had here.
BLOCK statements create a new level of scope and we're going to see this again when we use classes.
So every time that you create a block you've got a new level of scope.
So notice here I'm declaring Gnome again.
This is a different numnah I'm using the same name on purpose.
So now when I use it here in the output statement which number am I talking about.
Am I talking about this one here on 9:36 from my talking about the one on line 42.
Well you look in your closest scope first right.
You look for a local variable.
So this here refers to this number right here.
That's the variable.
So this is going to display 200.
What about this one here.
Number one the rule again that you follow.
Look inside here first.
Do you see a number one declared in here.
No you don't.
Then you look out to your outer scope.
There it is right here.
So that's the one I'm using and that will display 500
OK.
Hopefully that makes sense.
Now here we go.
We're using Gnome again.
But now we've got two Nom's we've got them here on 9:36 and we've got the name here on 9:42.
Which one do we use.
Well you look in your level of scope.
Your local variable.
You can't look into another block.
You notice how this block here could see out.
So we could see someone that's perfectly normal.
First you look in your local scope then you look outwards.
You don't look inwards.
OK so this numb refers to this guy right here on 9:36 So this is going to display 100 as well.
We'll go through a few more examples down here.
But let's run this one for us we're expecting 100 200 500 and 100.
So let me run this example and here we go 100 200 500 and 100.
Just what we expected when you read about scoping books on Web sites and tutorials.
It's really complicated when you first learn about your local non-local global and other stuff but conceptually
it's pretty straightforward.
First you look local then you look out out out out as far as you need to go until you find it.
If you don't find it you have a compiler error for sure.
All right.
So let's look at this one here.
I'm calling a function called local example and I'm passing in a 10 and let me show you what that function
looks like.
It's right here.
We expand a little.
So I'm calling this with a 10 so I'm passing in a 10 by value so this X right here will be a 10 right.
I'm going to copy the 10 I've got a numb variable right here and I'm initializing it's 1000.
So my output statement is using numb which number my using.
Well I've got two choices right.
I can use this one on line 20 or I can use this one on line 11.
I always use the local variable in this case.
I'm going to use this one on line 20 so this is going to display a thousand.
Then I'm setting numb equal to x.
Ok x is 10.
Which number am I talking about.
I'm talking about this number again.
So when I set this to 10 and I'm going to display Nahm which is again the 10.
So this will display a thousand and ten.
Notice that I can't use number one here because it's not within the scope that was defined inside main.
OK so if I run this I expect a thousand N10 and let's try that out.
And you go local numbers a thousand and then local number is 10.
Suppose I call this again but I pass him 20 into it.
And what do you think is going to happen.
Well let's go back here again.
In this case I'm passing you know 20.
So X is going to get to 20 I'm initialized to a thousand.
Every time I call this function that number will be initialized 2000.
So in this case there's no way I'm using this one right here again.
So this will display a thousand.
Now I'm setting that same variable to 20 and then I'm displaying it right here.
This is going to display 1020.
OK.
So it's the same idea and it's pretty straightforward.
Let me run this.
So we thought we saw 2010 we're going to see a thousand and 20.
OK so now let's look at example of global variable.
You'll notice that way up here the top of the program I want to scroll all the way up and we close that
function and expand this one.
This is what we've got right here we've got a global variable called numb right here on line 11 and
I'm initializing that global variable of 300.
How do I know it's a global variable.
It's not declared inside any function is not declared inside any class.
It's just sitting there all on its own right.
This is global to the entire program.
So in this case I'm calling global example and which number do I use.
What's the first thing you do you look in here.
Is there a variable called knowm defined in here.
No there isn't.
Then you look outward and there it is.
So this displays 300 then I take no minimal to apply to.
OK which Nahm.
Same one.
So this will now become 600 and I'm going to display 600.
Now what if I call this function again and I'll call it twice in the main.
What if I call it again.
Well the next time I call it this variable still has 600 in it it's a global variable.
So the next time I call it we look at Nahm numbers 600 which display I multiply it by 2.
OK so that's twelve hundred now.
And then I display it again.
So it's twelve hundred this time.
Notice the global variable does not get re-initialize every time it only gets initialized that one time
when you actually before main is even called that's initialized.
So here we're going to end up with 300 600 and then six hundred and twelve hundred.
So let's me and comment that one line out so we can call this twice right here.
And let's run that.
And you could see here we've got three hundred six hundred and six hundred twelve hundred.
Just what we would expect.
All right so let's look at one more example.
Here is the static local example and I scroll up close that down.
Now we mentioned what a static variable was a static variable is a variable that is defined locally.
In this case this is a static local variable so numb is visible in here.
But because we're using the static qualifier what that means is that this number variable will be initialized
to 5 0 0 0 0 in the first time this function is called.
After that it retains its previous value.
Real different from the example we see on local value which had got re-initialize every time.
So let's say I call static local example the first time we're initializing numb to 5000 that only happens
once.
Then I'm using it.
Which one.
Again I'm looking inside local scope first.
So that's going to display 5000 here then I'm incrementing number 0 0 0 0 0.
OK.
Now it's six 6000 and then I'm displaying it again.
Well now it's six thousand.
Now suppose I call static local again.
Since this has already been initialized it won't be initialized again and it's going to retain its previous
value.
So it's six thousand right now.
Here it is.
So if I display it I'm going to get a 6000 thousand and then I'm going to incremented again by a thousand
and display it again.
So I'm going to get 7000 and when I run this a third time I'll end up with the 7000 I started with.
And the eight thousand that I end up with.
So as you can see it's pretty straightforward.
This is a real useful concept the concept of static local variables because you've got to of a number
or a variable in this case that behaves like a global variable right because it's retaining its value
but its scope is local.
So you don't have the same problems that you have with global variables which means that they're visible
throughout the program in any piece of code could change it.
In this case if this number variable right here gets a really strange value.
The only place they could have gotten it from was inside this function and you know exactly where to
look.
So that wraps up scope.
It's a pretty simple concept.
And it's again think look local first then look out then look out and look out until you hit global
scope.
If you don't find that variable there then you've got a compiler error.